.TH SMARTIMGDIFF_PSNR 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartimgdiff_psnr \- compare two images and print the PSNR
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartimgdiff_psnr
.I image1
.I image2
.RI [ output ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartimgdiff_psnr
loads two images via ImageMagick (Magick++), confirms that they have
identical width, height and bit depth, computes the mean\(hysquared
error between them, and prints the corresponding peak signal\(hyto\(hynoise
ratio in decibels:
.PP
.RS 4
.B PSNR:
.I value
.B dB
.RE
.PP
Identical images print
.B PSNR: inf dB
(infinite ratio); larger numbers indicate more similar images. The
script is the actual measurement engine used by
.BR smartpngdiff (1).
.PP
When the optional
.I output
argument is given and the images differ, a difference image is
written to that path. The difference is computed with the
.B Difference
composite operator and contrast\(hystretched to make small pixel
deltas visible.
.PP
A mismatch in dimensions or bit depth is reported on standard error
and the script returns a negative PSNR value, after which it prints
.B "Failed to calculate PSNR."
to standard output.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I image1
First image to compare.
.TP
.I image2
Second image to compare.
.TP
.I output
Optional output path for the contrast\(hystretched difference image.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compare two PNG files:
.PP
.RS 4
smartimgdiff_psnr expected.png actual.png
.RE
.PP
Compare and write a difference image:
.PP
.RS 4
smartimgdiff_psnr expected.png actual.png diff.png
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartpngdiff (1),
.BR compare (1),
.BR composite (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
