.TH SMARTBUILD 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartbuild \- build the SmartMet package set from git in dependency order
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartbuild
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartbuild
orchestrates building, testing and installing the full set of
.BI smartmet- *
packages directly from their GitHub source repositories. It maintains
a workspace of bare git mirrors under
.B workspace/mirror/
inside the current directory, parses each project's
.B .spec
file to discover SmartMet dependencies, and walks them in topological
order. For each module it can either build and install via
.B make install
(developer mode) or build an RPM and install it with
.BR dnf / yum
(release mode).
.PP
A workspace must exist before the first build; pass
.B \-\-create-workspace
once to create
.BR workspace/mirror/ ,
.B workspace/log/
and
.BR workspace/export/ .
About 1.5 GB of disk space is required for the bare clones plus
additional space for build artefacts.
.PP
For each module, when building RPMs,
.B smartbuild
checks whether a release of the same version is already available in
the configured SmartMet RPM repositories and installs that instead of
rebuilding (skipping unnecessary work). With
.BR \-\-test-rpms ,
the current branch HEAD is built unconditionally with a local
.BR smartmkrelease (1)\(hystyle
version bump so the resulting RPM does not collide with any tagged
release; an embedded GIT SHA in the changelog lets
.B smartbuild
recognise an already\(hybuilt cached RPM in the export directory and
install it without rebuilding.
.PP
.BR sudo (8)
is required for package install steps, so the invoking user must have
the appropriate privileges.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print built\(hyin help and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " file"
Read module configuration from the given JSON file (sections
.BR modules ", " ignore ", " recursive ).
.TP
.B \-\-default-config
Use the built\(hyin default module list (the public smartmet\-* set).
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-config .
.TP
.B \-\-create-workspace
Create
.B workspace/mirror/
under the current directory. Required at first run; the explicit flag
exists so accidental invocation from a wrong directory does not start
downloading gigabytes of source.
.TP
.B \-\-release-rpms
Build RPMs of the latest released versions, skipping modules whose
release RPM is already present in the configured SmartMet repos.
.TP
.B \-\-test-rpms
Build test RPMs from the current branch HEAD. A local
.BR smartmkrelease (1)\(hystyle
version bump is created in the temporary build tree so no release tag
is required and the availability check is skipped. Cached RPMs whose
changelog matches the current commit SHA are reused.
.TP
.B \-\-release
Build, test and install the latest released versions via
.BR "make install" .
.TP
.B \-\-current
Build, test and install the current HEAD of the configured branch
(see
.BR \-\-branch ).
.TP
.BI \-\-branch " branches"
Colon\(hyseparated branch list to try in order; for example
.B devel:master
uses
.B devel
when present and falls back to
.BR master .
.TP
.B \-\-recursive
Walk and build SmartMet dependencies recursively before each module.
.TP
.B \-\-update
Only update local git mirrors, do not build.
.TP
.B \-\-local
Do not contact remote git; reuse what the mirrors already have.
.TP
.B \-\-dump-config
Print the resolved configuration as JSON and exit (no build, no git
update).
.TP
.B \-\-dump-available
Print package versions found in the SmartMet RPM repositories and
exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-add-module " name[,name...]"
Add one or more SmartMet modules to the configuration. May be given
multiple times. A repository name different from the module name may
be supplied as
.IB name ( repo ) \fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-remove-module " name[,name...]"
Remove modules from the configuration.
.TP
.BI \-\-add-ignore " name[,name...]"
Add a SmartMet module name to the ignore list (will not be built even
if listed as a dependency).
.TP
.BI \-\-remove-ignore " name[,name...]"
Remove a name from the ignore list.
.TP
.BI \-\-set-private " name[,name...]"
.TQ
.BI \-\-clear-private " name[,name...]"
Mark a module as private or public. Affects the export directory
under
.BR workspace/export/ .
.TP
.B \-\-asan
Pass
.B ASAN=yes
to make (AddressSanitizer build).
.TP
.B \-\-tsan
Pass
.B TSAN=yes
to make (ThreadSanitizer build). Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-asan .
.TP
.B \-\-clang
Pass
.B CXX=clang++
to make.
.TP
.B \-\-builddep
Run
.B "dnf builddep"
(or
.BR yum-builddep )
on each spec before building. Implied by
.BR \-\-release-rpms .
.TP
.B \-\-https
Use
.B https://github.com/fmidev
instead of the default
.B git@github.com:fmidev
URL prefix.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore-installed
Build packages newer than what is installed even when the SmartMet
repository already provides the same version.
.TP
.B \-\-separate-logs
Write each module's build, test and install output to a separate file
under
.BR workspace/log/ .
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Dump settings and module structures to standard output.
.TP
.BI \-\-docker= version
Re\(hyrun the build inside a Docker container based on the matching
.B fmidev/smartmet-cibase\-\fIversion\fR
image (RHEL versions
.BR 8 ", " 9 ", " 10 ).
The current working directory and host SSH keys are bind\(hymounted,
host UID/GID is preserved, and
.B \-\-builddep
is added automatically. A throw\(hyaway image with passwordless
.BR sudo (8)
and the script's own
.B Requires:
packages installed is built first and removed on exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
First\(hytime workspace setup:
.PP
.RS 4
smartbuild \-\-default\-config \-\-create\-workspace
.RE
.PP
Build released RPMs of the default module set, recursively:
.PP
.RS 4
smartbuild \-\-default\-config \-\-release\-rpms \-\-recursive
.RE
.PP
Build a test RPM of the current
.B devel
branch of one plugin:
.PP
.RS 4
smartbuild \-\-default\-config \-\-test\-rpms \-\-branch devel:master \\
.br
.RS 0
.RE
.RS 4
\-\-add\-module smartmet\-plugin\-timeseries
.RE
.RE
.PP
Reproduce a RHEL 9 release build inside Docker:
.PP
.RS 4
smartbuild \-\-default\-config \-\-release\-rpms \-\-docker=9
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartbuildrev (1),
.BR smartbuildtmprpm (1),
.BR smartmkrelease (1),
.BR smartmktag (1),
.BR smartrpmsort (1),
.BR make (1),
.BR rpm (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
