.TH SMARTMKRELEASE 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartmkrelease \- bump the spec version, commit and tag a new release
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartmkrelease
.I "description ..."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartmkrelease
cuts a new release of the SmartMet package in the current directory
by editing its
.B .spec
file and recording the change in git.
.PP
The script first locates the unique
.BI smartmet- *.spec
file in the current directory (exactly one is required), reads its
current
.B Version:
and
.B Release:
lines, and decides on the next version. The new version is the
current date encoded as
.IB year . month . day
where
.I year
is the last two digits of the current year. If that calendar date
already matches the existing version, the
.B Release:
counter is incremented; otherwise it resets to
.BR 1 .
.PP
The script then rewrites the spec file in place: the
.B Version:
and
.B Release:
lines are updated, and a new
.B %changelog
entry is prepended carrying the description supplied on the command
line and the author's name and email taken from
.B "git config user.name"
and
.BR "git config user.email" .
A unified diff is printed for review.
.PP
Finally the modified spec is staged and committed with the message
.RB \(lq "New version " \fIversion\fR-\fIrelease\fR.fmi \(rq,
and a git tag matching
.IB version - release
is created on that commit.
.PP
A version description must be passed on the command line. The script
refuses to run if there are uncommitted changes in the working tree
.RB ( "git diff"
returns non\(hyempty); commit or stash them first.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I description
Free\(hyform changelog text describing the release. Multiple
arguments are joined with spaces and become the body of the new
.B %changelog
entry.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS 4
smartmkrelease 'Fix race in cache eviction'
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartmktag (1),
.BR smartbuild (1),
.BR smartbuildrev (1),
.BR smartbuildtmprpm (1),
.BR git (1),
.BR rpm (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
