.TH SMARTMKCICONFIG 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartmkciconfig \- regenerate the SmartMet CircleCI configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartmkciconfig
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartmkciconfig
generates
.B .circleci/config.yml
from a built\(hyin template, parameterised by the list of RHEL
versions to target. It is run inside any SmartMet repository to keep
each project's CI configuration in lockstep with the rest of the
ecosystem.
.PP
The list of RHEL versions is read from
.B ~/.ci-rhel-versions
(whitespace\(hyseparated, single line). When that file is absent the
script defaults to
.BR 8 .
For each version
.IR N ,
three jobs are emitted:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
.BI build-rhel N
\(em runs
.B "ci-build deps"
and
.B "ci-build rpm"
in
.B fmidev/smartmet-cibase\-\fIN\fR:latest
and persists the resulting RPMs.
.IP \(bu 2
.BI test-rhel N
\(em installs the built RPMs and runs
.B "ci-build testprep"
followed by
.BR "ci-build test" .
Skipped when
.B .circleci/disable-tests-in-ci
exists.
.IP \(bu 2
.BI upload-rhel N
\(em syncs the artefacts to S3
.RB ( fmi-smartmet-cicd-beta ).
.RE
.PP
A
.BI unit-test-rhel N
job is added when
.B .circleci/include-unit-test-step
exists (currently used by the WFS plugin).
.PP
The new YAML is written to
.B .circleci/config.yml.new
first. If it is byte\(hyidentical to the existing
.BR config.yml ,
the new file is removed and the script reports
.B "No changed detected."
Otherwise the old config is renamed to
.B .circleci/config.yml~
as a backup and the new one takes its place.
.PP
.B smartmkciconfig
exits with status
.B 1
when no
.B .circleci/config.yml
exists in the current directory; the script does not bootstrap that
file from scratch.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.ci-rhel-versions
Whitespace\(hyseparated list of RHEL major versions to generate jobs
for.
.TP
.B .circleci/config.yml
The generated CircleCI configuration.
.TP
.B .circleci/config.yml~
Backup of the previous configuration.
.TP
.B .circleci/disable-tests-in-ci
Marker file: when present, no
.B test-rhel\fIN\fR
jobs are emitted.
.TP
.B .circleci/include-unit-test-step
Marker file: when present, an extra
.B unit-test-rhel\fIN\fR
job is emitted.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS 4
echo '8 10' > ~/.ci\-rhel\-versions
.br
smartmkciconfig
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartbuild (1),
.BR make (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
