.TH SMARTPNGDIFF 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartpngdiff \- compare a PNG against a reference and report PSNR pass/fail
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartpngdiff
.I ok_png
.I png
.I diff_png
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartpngdiff
is the visual\(hyregression test driver used by SmartMet test suites.
It compares a freshly produced PNG against a reference PNG, writes a
contrast\(hystretched difference image, and classifies the result by
peak signal\(hyto\(hynoise ratio.
.PP
The difference image is built first by piping the two inputs through
.BR composite (1)
with the
.B \-compose DIFFERENCE
operator and through
.B convert
(or
.BR magick (1))
with
.B "\-contrast-stretch 0"
so that even small per\(hypixel deviations become visible.
.PP
The PSNR is then measured by
.BR smartimgdiff_psnr (1),
which is searched for first next to
.B smartpngdiff
itself and then on the
.BR PATH .
The PSNR value drives the verdict:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
.B PSNR == infinity
\(em images are bit\(hyidentical;
.B OK
is reported and the script exits with status
.BR 0 .
.IP \(bu 2
.B PSNR >= 50 dB
\(em differences below visual threshold;
.B OK
with the PSNR value, exit
.BR 0 .
.IP \(bu 2
.B "20 dB <= PSNR < 50 dB"
\(em
.B WARNING
with the PSNR value, exit
.BR 0 .
.IP \(bu 2
.B PSNR < 20 dB
\(em
.B FAIL
with the PSNR value, exit
.BR 100 .
.IP \(bu 2
PSNR could not be parsed (corrupt image, dimension mismatch, etc.)
\(em
.BR FAIL ,
exit
.BR 100 .
.RE
.PP
If the
.I png
input does not exist the script prints
.B "*** FAILED: '...' not created"
and exits with status
.BR 255 .
.PP
ANSI colour output is suppressed when the
.B CI
environment variable is set, so test logs in CI remain plain text.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I ok_png
Reference PNG (the expected image).
.TP
.I png
Actual PNG produced by the test under inspection.
.TP
.I diff_png
Path to write the contrast\(hystretched difference image.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
PSNR in the OK or WARNING range, or images identical.
.TP
.B 100
PSNR below threshold or comparison failed.
.TP
.B 255
Actual PNG file is missing.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS 4
smartpngdiff results_ok/contour.png results/contour.png \\
.br
.RS 0
.RE
.RS 4
results_diff/contour.png
.RE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartimgdiff_psnr (1),
.BR composite (1),
.BR convert (1),
.BR magick (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
