.TH SMARTABICHECK 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartabicheck \- quick ABI sanity check for a SmartMet library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartabicheck
.I name
.I newlib
.RB [ \-\-deep ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartabicheck
compares a freshly\(hybuilt SmartMet library against the version
currently installed from the corresponding
.B smartmet-library-\fIname\fR
RPM, then asks whether each installed consumer (plugin, engine, server
binary, tool) would still link against the new build.
.PP
The check runs in three layers. The first two are cheap and always
performed. The third is opt\(hyin and requires
.BR libabigail (1).
.SS Cheap layer
For every installed consumer that lists
.BI libsmartmet- name
in its
.B DT_NEEDED
entries, the script runs
.B "ldd \-r"
twice \(em once with the old library on the system loader path and
once with the new library substituted in via
.BR LD_LIBRARY_PATH .
Symbols that become unresolved only with the new library are reported
as breaks; pre\(hyexisting unresolved symbols cancel out so unrelated
stale libraries on the host do not produce false positives. References
to
.B SmartMet::Engine::
symbols are filtered out because those are bound at runtime by the
SmartMet server.
.PP
The cheap layer additionally diffs the exported vtable, typeinfo and
data\(hyobject symbol sizes (those starting with
.BR _ZTV ", " _ZTI ", " _ZTS
or with
.B nm
classes
.BR D ", " B ", " R ", " G )
between old and new libraries. Removed entries and size changes are
reported as warnings, since a vtable layout change can break consumers
silently at runtime even when they still link.
.PP
The cheap layer detects:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
removed, renamed or signature\(hychanged exported symbols
(link\(hytime breakage),
.IP \(bu 2
vtable size changes (silent virtual\(hydispatch breakage),
.IP \(bu 2
exported data size changes (silent global\(hylayout breakage).
.RE
.PP
The cheap layer does
.B not
detect:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
private struct members added or reordered,
.IP \(bu 2
inline function body changes,
.IP \(bu 2
enum value renumbering.
.RE
.SS Deep layer
With
.BR \-\-deep ,
.B abicompat
from libabigail is run for every consumer with the old and new
libraries, providing full type\(hyaware verification including the
cases the cheap layer cannot see. If
.B abicompat
is not installed, the script exits with status 2.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I name
Bare library name without the
.B libsmartmet-
prefix and without the
.B .so
suffix; for example
.BR macgyver ", " spine ", " gis .
The corresponding installed package is
.BI smartmet-library- name \fR.
.TP
.I newlib
Path to the freshly\(hybuilt
.BI libsmartmet- name .so
shared object to test.
.TP
.B \-\-deep
Run the libabigail
.B abicompat
check after the cheap layer.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Library is ABI\(hycompatible (no breaks, no suspect signatures), or
the package was not installed and there was nothing to compare.
.TP
.B 1
At least one consumer would fail to link, or the deep check rejected
the new library.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error or missing dependency (for example
.B \-\-deep
without
.BR abicompat ).
.SH EXAMPLES
Quick check of a freshly\(hybuilt macgyver:
.PP
.RS 4
smartabicheck macgyver libsmartmet\-macgyver.so
.RE
.PP
Full type\(hyaware check:
.PP
.RS 4
smartabicheck macgyver libsmartmet\-macgyver.so \-\-deep
.RE
.PP
.B smartabicheck
is normally invoked indirectly via the
.B abicheck
and
.B abicheck-deep
targets in
.BR makefile.inc .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartcheckinstalled (1),
.BR make (1),
.BR ldd (1),
.BR nm (1),
.BR readelf (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
