.TH SMARTBUILDCFG 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartbuildcfg \- query the SmartMet build configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartbuildcfg
.B \-\-prefix
.br
.B smartbuildcfg
.B \-\-cflags
.RI [ requires ...]
.br
.B smartbuildcfg
.B \-\-libs
.RI [ requires ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartbuildcfg
is a small
.BR pkg-config (1)\(hystyle
helper used by the shared SmartMet
.B makefile.inc
to locate the install prefix and to translate the
.B REQUIRES
list of a project into compiler and linker flags.
.PP
With
.BR \-\-prefix ,
the install prefix is derived from the script's own absolute path
(the parent of the
.B bin
directory in which it lives) and printed to standard output. The
makefile fragment uses this to find the SmartMet
.B share/smartmet/devel
data alongside the script.
.PP
With
.B \-\-cflags
or
.BR \-\-libs ,
each remaining positional argument is a dependency name as listed in a
project's
.B REQUIRES
makefile variable. Recognised names include
.BR cairo ", " configpp ", " ctpp2 ", " fmt ", " gdal ", " geos ", "
.BR icu-i18n ", " jsoncpp ", " librsvg ", " mariadb " and " xerces-c .
For libraries that ship in versioned install prefixes
.RB ( gdal ", " geos ", " configpp ),
.B smartbuildcfg
probes well\(hyknown locations such as
.IR /usr/gdal38 ,
.I /usr/geos312
or
.I /usr/libconfig17
in turn before falling back to the system path or to
.BR pkg-config .
For
.B boost169
on RHEL 7\(hystyle hosts the appropriate
.B \-isystem
and
.B \-L
flags are added when
.I /usr/include/boost169
exists. Recognised
.BR pkg-config (1)
backed names are dispatched through pkg\(hyconfig in a single batch.
.PP
The compiler is also probed via its
.B \-\-version
output to add a
.B \-std=c++17
flag (or
.B c++11
on legacy GCC 5). The
.B CXX
environment variable selects the compiler;
.B g++
is used if it is not set.
.PP
Unrecognised dependency names produce no output (they are intended to
be handled by the makefile's own dispatch).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-prefix
Print the install prefix (e.g.\&
.BR /usr ).
.TP
.B \-\-cflags
Print the compile flags for the requested dependencies.
.TP
.B \-\-libs
Print the link flags for the requested dependencies.
.SH EXAMPLES
Find the install prefix:
.PP
.RS 4
smartbuildcfg \-\-prefix
.RE
.PP
Compile and link flags for a project that requires fmt, jsoncpp and
GDAL:
.PP
.RS 4
smartbuildcfg \-\-cflags fmt jsoncpp gdal
.br
smartbuildcfg \-\-libs   fmt jsoncpp gdal
.RE
.PP
.B smartbuildcfg
is invoked from
.B makefile.inc
roughly as:
.PP
.RS 4
include $(shell smartbuildcfg \-\-prefix)/share/smartmet/devel/makefile.inc
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pkg-config (1),
.BR make (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
