.TH SMARTCHECKINSTALLED 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-utils" "SmartMet Build Tools"
.SH NAME
smartcheckinstalled \- verify the installed SmartMet package set is self\(hyconsistent
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartcheckinstalled
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartcheckinstalled
runs
.B "ldd \-r"
against every installed plugin, engine, server binary and tool that
links a
.BI libsmartmet- *
library, collects the unresolved symbols, and tries to attribute each
of them to a likely source.
.PP
On startup the script builds an in\(hymemory index of every symbol
exported from
.B /usr/lib64/libsmartmet-*.so
and from every engine
.B .so
under
.B /usr/share/smartmet/engines/
by running
.B nm
through
.BR c++filt .
For each unresolved symbol from
.B "ldd \-r"
output it then performs three lookup attempts: an exact match, a
function\(hyname (parameter list ignored) match, and finally an
enclosing class or namespace match. The first hit determines the
classification.
.SS Categories
.TP
.B engine:\fIname\fR
The symbol is provided by an engine
.B .so
and will be resolved at runtime by the SmartMet server when the
engine is loaded. This is the expected late\(hybinding case and is
suppressed in the report. References that demangle to
.B SmartMet::Engine::*
are filtered out at the
.B "ldd \-r"
stage for the same reason.
.TP
.B lib:\fIname\fR (linked, signature mismatch)
The symbol is exported by a SmartMet library that is already in the
binary's
.B DT_NEEDED
list, but the exact symbol cannot be resolved. The library version
is most likely out of step with the headers the binary was built
against; reinstalling the providing package usually fixes it.
.TP
.B lib:\fIname\fR (not linked \(em add \-l\fIname\fR)
The symbol is exported by a SmartMet library that the binary does
.I not
list as a dependency. The fix is to add
.BI \-l name
to the binary's link line and rebuild.
.TP
.B near match
A function with the same name but a different parameter list, or a
sibling symbol from the same class/namespace, exists in some
installed SmartMet library or engine. This typically indicates a
header/library version skew \(em rebuild against the current headers.
.TP
.B not found
No installed SmartMet library defines this symbol nor anything close
to it. The providing package is missing or stale.
.PP
Files under
.B /usr/share/smartmet/python/
are skipped because their unresolved symbols are bound at runtime
through the embedded Python interpreter.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All checked binaries are clean (or no SmartMet ELF files were
installed at all).
.TP
.B 1
At least one installed binary has unresolved symbols that cannot be
explained by a late\(hybound engine.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B smartcheckinstalled
takes no arguments:
.PP
.RS 4
sudo smartcheckinstalled
.RE
.PP
.BR sudo (8)
is not strictly required for the inspection itself but is convenient
in environments where the SmartMet packages live under root\(hyowned
paths whose
.B nm
output may need elevated read access.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartabicheck (1),
.BR ldd (1),
.BR nm (1),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR rpm (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-utils/issues>.
